Queχ - Lexical Analyser Generator (html drafts)
===============================================
Frank-Rene Schaefer <fschaef@users.sourceforge.net>
0.15.4, 9. September, 2007



== Introduction
include::intro/intro.txt[]

=== Installation
include::intro/installation.txt[]

=== Licensing Information
include::intro/license.txt[]

=== The Name of the Game
include::intro/naming.txt[]



== Basics
include::basics/intro.txt[]

=== Pattern Matching
include::basics/pattern-matching.txt[]

=== The Token Queue
include::basics/token-queue.txt[]

=== Lexical Analysis Modes
include::basics/modes.txt[]

=== Mode Inheritance
include::basics/mode-inheritance.txt[]

=== Mode Transitions
include::basics/mode-transitions.txt[]

=== Indentation
include::basics/indentation.txt[]

=== Line and Column Number Counting
include::basics/line-column-counting.txt[]

=== Summary
include::basics/summary.txt[]



== Practical Usage
include::practical/intro.txt[]

=== Patterns
include::practical/patterns.txt[]

=== Token-ID
include::practical/token-ids.txt[]

=== Modes
include::practical/modes.txt[]

=== Pattern-Action Pairs
include::practical/pattern-action-pairs.txt[]

=== Calling Queχ
include::practical/calling-quex.txt[]

=== Summary
include::practical/summary.txt[]

== Formal Usage
include::formal/intro.txt[]

=== Regular Expression Syntax
include::formal/patterns/intro.txt[]

=== Context Free Regular Expressions
include::formal/patterns/context-free.txt[]

==== Character Set Expressions
include::formal/patterns/character-set-expressions.txt[]

==== Unicode Character Properties
include::formal/patterns/ucs-properties.txt[]

==== Pitfalls
include::formal/patterns/context-free-pitfalls.txt[]

=== Pre- and Post-Conditions
include::formal/patterns/context-dependent.txt[]

==== Pitfalls
include::formal/patterns/context-dependent-pitfalls.txt[]

=== Specification of Starting Mode with `start`
include::basics/start-mode.txt[]

=== Mode Characteristics
include::formal/modes.txt[]

=== Pattern-Action Pairs
include::formal/pattern-action.txt[]

=== Pattern Action Shortcuts
include::formal/pattern-action-shortcuts.txt[]

=== Priorities
include::formal/pattern-action-priorities.txt[]

=== The Match Event
include::formal/match_event.txt[]

=== Mode Transition Events
include::formal/mode-transitions.txt[]

==== Caveat
include::formal/mode-transitions-caveat.txt[]

=== Indentation Events
include::formal/indentation-events.txt[]

=== Lexical Analyser Class
include::formal/generated-class/intro.txt[]

==== General User Interface
include::formal/generated-class/ui.txt[]

==== Mode Handling
include::formal/generated-class/mode-handling.txt[]

==== Mode Objects
include::formal/generated-class/mode-objects.txt[]

==== Token Handling
include::formal/generated-class/token-handling.txt[]

==== The Accumulator
include::formal/generated-class/accumulator.txt[]

==== Class Body Extensions with `body`
include::formal/generated-class/class-body-extension.txt[]

==== Constructor Extensions with `init`
include::formal/generated-class/constructor-extension.txt[]

==== Including Files/Switching Buffers
include::formal/generated-class/switching-buffers.txt[]

=== Character Encoding (Unicode Support)
include::formal/character-encoding/intro.txt[]

=== Pasting Header Information with `header`
include::formal/pasting-header.txt[]

=== Deriving from Lexical Analyser
include::formal/derivation.txt[]

=== User defined Token Classes
include::formal/user-token-class.txt[]

=== Summary of Code Sections
include::formal/code-sections.txt[]

=== Macro Switches
include::formal/macro.txt[]


== Query Mode
include::query/intro.txt[]

=== Unicode Properties
include::query/properties.txt[]

=== Character Set Expressions
include::query/character-set-expressions.txt[]

=== Wilcard Expansions
include::query/property-wilcard-expansions.txt[]

=== Command Line Options
include::formal/command-line-options.txt[]



== Transition Graph Generation
include::plot/intro.txt[]


== Appendix: Unicode Character Properties
include::appendix/ucs_properties/intro.txt[]

=== Unicode Character Property Settings
include::appendix/ucs_properties/property-settings.txt[]

== Appendix: Quex Intern: Generation of the Core Engine
include::inside-quex/intro.txt[]

=== Introduction
include::inside-quex/intro/intro.txt[]


==== The Big Picture
include::inside-quex/intro/the-big-picture.txt[]

==== Post-Conditions
include::inside-quex/intro/post-conditions.txt[]

==== Pre-Conditions
include::inside-quex/intro/pre-conditions.txt[]

==== Generation Steps
include::inside-quex/intro/generation-steps.txt[]


=== Thomson Construction
include::inside-quex/thomson-construction/intro.txt[]

  
==== Mounting State Machines in Sequence
include::inside-quex/thomson-construction/serial.txt[]

==== Mounting State Machines in Parallel
include::inside-quex/thomson-construction/parallel.txt[]

==== Implementing Repeated State Machines
include::inside-quex/thomson-construction/repetition.txt[]


=== Labeling State Origins
include::inside-quex/labeling-states.txt[]

=== Subset Construction--NFA to DFA
include::inside-quex/NFA-to-DFA.txt[]

=== Hopcroft Optimization
include::inside-quex/hopcroft-optimization.txt[]

=== Code Generation
include::inside-quex/code-generation/core.txt[]

==== State Transition Header
include::inside-quex/code-generation/header.txt[]

==== State Transition Triggering
include::inside-quex/code-generation/state-transitions.txt[]


== Appendix: The Buffer
include::inside-quex/buffer/intro.txt[]

=== Programming Interface
include::inside-quex/buffer/API.txt[]

=== Mechanisms
include::inside-quex/buffer/mechanisms.txt[]

      
=== Loading from File
include::inside-quex/buffer/load.txt[]
      
=== Creation of A Buffer Object
include::inside-quex/buffer/constructor.txt[]

=== Input Methods
include::inside-quex/buffer/input-methods.txt[]

(To be Continued)
